# Why Multiplier?

**What analysis challenges does Multiplier solve?**

Most program analyses operate on at most one representation, e.g. a program’s AST, LLVM IR, or machine code. These analyses use approximate source location information embedded to report their results back to users. Then, it's up to the user to open their code editor of choice, find the relevant lines of code, and stare hard at them until the results make sense. This process fails on two key fronts.

First, focusing on a single abstract program representation limits the scope of what can be achieved with program analysis. There is no one-size-fits-all program abstraction. High-level representations are dense and rely on implicit behaviors. Low-level representations are more efficiently analyzable but also harder to relate to source (e.g., inlined and optimized data structure operations). Exploits cross the semantic gap, from logic bugs that are apparent only in high-level source, to byte locations that are knowable only in low-level representations. What is needed are multiple representations that can span this semantic gap, enabling analyses to operate at the best-fit level, without losing the connection back to source.

Second, code locations are approximate, and even when precise, they may point the user to “unhelpful” locations, such as macro definitions, or generic methods within C++ templates that, only through specialization, take on concrete meaning. Having a user navigate to these locations is only slightly burdensome. The true loss in capability is the inability for users to create workflows that leverage results produced by one analysis and use them in another analysis. How is a second analysis supposed to do anything meaningful when a first analysis tells us about a polymorphic source location like a line of code inside of a macro definition or C++ class template?

The crux of the problem is that the source of truth for typical code indexers, language servers, code editors, and even debugging formats is the `file:line:column` source location triple. Source locations cannot express that some code is part of a macro expansion or template specialization. In fact, the most reliable way to follow code references while maintaining the proper context-sensitivity is to browse the compiled machine code in an interactive disassembler like Ghidra. This is because machine code has already been monomorphized: macro expansions and template specializations produce different machine code located at different addresses. When you click on a call to `std::vector<char>::push_back`, it brings you to a different address than clicking on a call to `std::vector<double>::push_back`.

Multiplier provides efficient, precise, and comprehensive code understanding capabilities by storing a compressed representation of build artifacts, called entities, in an index database. Entities in Multiplier’s index include files, tokens, macro expansions, abstract syntax tree (AST) nodes, and compilations (represented with MLIR). Each entity is uniquely identified by a 64 bit integer, and is available through scripting in C++ or Python as a fully formed object with methods. For example, the AST entities (declarations, statements, types, templates, etc.) are persistent forms of AST nodes found in Clang, and the methods available on these entities mirror those that can be called on those objects in-memory in Clang. Although Multiplier is based on Clang, it breaks from it in how it represents and relates entities to source code. Whereas Clang stores source locations, Mutliplier stores token entity IDs. Token entities can belong to files, macro expansions, or template specializations. In the latter two cases, macro and template tokens can relate back to file tokens. This allows polymorphic code, e.g. a template specialization declaration AST node, to have its own version of the source code. This mirrors a compiler’s normal process of monomorphization during code generation, and provides an “Ghidra, but for source code” capability.
